Source: Fastweb - "How to Juggle Part-Time Work and Scholarship Applications"
URL: https://www.fastweb.com/student-life/articles/how-to-juggle-part-time-work-and-scholarship-applications
Author: Kathryn Knight Randolph
Date: October 23, 2025
Type: Article/Guide

---

How to Juggle Part-Time Work and Scholarship Applications

Plan and strategize to make the most of your time as you save up and win scholarships for college.

Working part-time and applying for scholarships requires balance, intentionality, and organization. Having a job and applying for scholarships are both worthwhile pursuits that can result in huge payoffs. A part-time job can help you pay for your student life experience, while scholarships will offset tuition costs.

Managing both, however, is not as easy as it sounds. You need a strategic plan that enables you to succeed.

Why Balancing Work and Scholarship Applications Matters

There's a reason so many retailers and food services provide student discounts: being a student is expensive. For that reason, many students seek out part-time jobs to help them pay for school. But working part-time shouldn't come at the cost of searching and applying for scholarships.

At the same time, your scholarship search shouldn't be so all-consuming that you don't have the bandwidth to work throughout the week. As a student, you will inevitably learn how to balance your responsibilities and working a part-time job, while searching for scholarships will bring you one step closer to achieving success in this skill.

Time Management Tips for Balancing Work and Scholarship Applications

The right strategies can help you streamline your scholarship application process as you put in the hours at your part-time job. It will take time management, dedication, and organization.

Create a Realistic Schedule

First, write down all your responsibilities: attending class, studying, working part-time, and applying for scholarships. Then, create a weekly schedule that you will actually stick to. Avoid budgeting 20+ hours per week for part-time work. That will conflict with attending class and studying, not to mention applying for scholarships.

The beauty of working part-time as a student is that many employers understand the pull to work but also to show up well for class and studying. Start small with your hours, between 5 – 8 hours per week, and then build from there.

As you create your schedule, include scholarship application deadlines and set weekly reminders a week prior. This will prompt you to start working on applications that you haven't already started.

Treat Scholarship Applications Like a Class

Just like you will block time for classes, studying, and working, you also need to block time on your calendar for scholarship application work. Fortunately, this won't take up as much time as your other commitments.

Some weeks, you may be able to work for an hour; others may allow for five or more. Take the scholarship application hours week by week, but make it a goal to dedicate some time to it.

Use Tools to Stay Organized

Thankfully, we live in an age where it's easy to outsource your calendar, time management, and reminders to apps on your phone. While you may have to manually input information, these apps can help to facilitate a more streamlined approach to balancing your student life.

Some helpful calendar, time blocking, and reminder apps for students include:

- Sunsama – Provides a task manager, calendar, and daily planner to keep students organized.
- Todoist – Allows students to set up a to-do list on a project-by-project basis (or by homework, work, and scholarship buckets) and check things off as they are accomplished.
- MyStudyLife – Synchronizes across devices and helps students block time to create schedules, sends reminders and task updates, and includes a Pomodoro timer to help boost focus.

How Part-Time Work Can Lead to Scholarship Success

Your part-time job offers more than just a paycheck to help pay for college. You're also gaining experience, which can be invaluable to your actual scholarship applications.

First, having a part-time job will make you look like a student who can balance different responsibilities, exercise excellent time management skills, and accomplish goals. This is the prerequisite many scholarship providers have for the students they seek to recognize and award.

Part-time jobs can also provide valuable experiences and acquired skill sets that are worth highlighting in scholarship essays. For instance, an interaction with a customer can lead to a compelling lesson learned. Or a new skill can reflect what a student has learned while working.

Finally, some scholarship applications may ask for a letter of recommendation as part of the requirements. An employer can provide a great recommendation for a hard-working, loyal, and well-rounded student employee.

Key Takeaways for Juggling Work and Scholarship Applications

Balancing school, work, and scholarship applications can be tough, but navigating it well is possible with the right plan, tools, and attitude. Use apps and other resources to set boundaries and reminders to help you stay on top of your personal workload.

As you consider applying for scholarships, start work on each application as soon as possible and keep a steady pace throughout the process. Also, keep all your scholarship application materials, as you may be able to reuse or slightly modify them for others.

Paying for school with a part-time job and/or scholarship winnings is worth the investment. It can result in less financial stress during and after college, setting you up for success right after graduation.
